You do not meet a man but frowns: our bloods
No more obey the heavens than our courtiers
Still seem as does the king's.
But what's the matter?
His daughter, and the heir of's kingdom,
whom he purposed to his wife's sole son--a widow
That late he married--hath referr'd herself
Unto a poor but worthy gentleman: she's wedded;
Her husband banish'd; she imprison'd:
all Is outward sorrow; though I think the king
Be touch'd at very heart.
None but the king?
He that hath lost her too; so is the queen,
That most desired the match; but not a courtier,
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the king's look's, hath a heart that is not
Glad at the thing they scowl at.
And why so?
He that hath miss'd the princess is a thing
Too bad for bad report: and he that hath her--
I mean, that married her, alack, good man!
And therefore banish'd--is a creature such
As, to seek through the regions of the earth
For one his like, there would be something failing
In him that should compare. I do not think
So fair an outward and such stuff within
Endows a man but he.
You speak him far.
I do extend him, sir, within himself,
Crush him together rather than unfold
His measure duly.
What's his name and birth?
I cannot delve him to the root: his father
Was call'd Sicilius, who did join his honour
Against the Romans with Cassibelan,
But had his titles by Tenantius whom
He served with glory and admired success,
So gain'd the sur-addition Leonatus;
And had, besides this gentleman in question,
Two other sons, who in the wars o' the time
Died with their swords in hand;
for which their father,
Then old and fond of issue, took such sorrow
That he quit being, and his gentle lady,
Big of this gentleman our theme, deceased
As he was born. The king he takes the babe
To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
Breeds him and makes him of his bed-chamber,
Puts to him all the learnings that his time
Could make him the receiver of; which he took,
As we do air, fast as 'twas minister'd,
And in's spring became a harvest, lived in court--
Which rare it is to do--most praised, most loved,
A sample to the youngest, to the more mature
A glass that feated them, and to the graver
A child that guided dotards; to his mistress,
For whom he now is banish'd, her own price
Proclaims how she esteem'd him and his virtue;
By her election may be truly read
What kind of man he is.
I honour him
Even out of your report. But, pray you, tell me,
Is she sole child to the king?
His only child.
He had two sons: if this be worth your hearing,
Mark it: the eldest of them at three years old,
I' the swathing-clothes the other, from their nursery
Were stol'n, and to this hour no guess in knowledge
Which way they went.
How long is this ago?
Some twenty years.
That a king's children should be so convey'd,
So slackly guarded, and the search so slow,
That could not trace them!
Howsoe'er 'tis strange,
Or that the negligence may well be laugh'd at,
Yet is it true.
I do well believe you.
No, be assured you shall not find me, daughter,
After the slander of most stepmothers,
Evil-eyed unto you: you're my prisoner,
but your gaoler shall deliver you the keys
That lock up your restraint.
For you, Posthumus,
So soon as I can win the offended king,
I will be known your advocate: marry, yet
The fire of rage is in him, and 'twere good
You lean'd unto his sentence with what patience
Your wisdom may inform you.
Please your highness,
I will from hence to-day.
You know the peril.
I'll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying
The pangs of barr'd affections, though the king
Hath charged you should not speak together.
Dissembling courtesy! How fine this tyrant
Can tickle where she wounds!
My dearest husband,
I something fear my father's wrath; but nothing--
Always reserved my holy duty--what
His rage can do on me: you must be gone;
And I shall here abide the hourly shot
Of angry eyes, not comforted to live,
But that there is this jewel in the world
That I may see again.
My queen! my mistress!
O lady, weep no more, lest I give cause
To be suspected of more tenderness
Than doth become a man. I will remain
The loyal'st husband that did e'er plight troth:
My residence in Rome at one Philario's,
Who to my father was a friend, to me
Known but by letter: thither write, my queen,
And with mine eyes I'll drink the words you send,
Though ink be made of gall.
Be brief, I pray you:
If the king come, I shall incur I know not
How much of his displeasure.
Should we be taking leave
As long a term as yet we have to live,
The loathness to depart would grow. Adieu!
Nay, stay a little:
Were you but riding forth to air yourself,
Such parting were too petty. Look here, love;
This diamond was my mother's: take it, heart;
But keep it till you woo another wife,
When Imogen is dead.
How, how! another?
You gentle gods, give me but this I have,
And sear up my embracements from a next
With bonds of death!
Remain, remain thou here
While sense can keep it on.
And, sweetest, fairest,
As I my poor self did exchange for you,
To your so infinite loss, so in our trifles
I still win of you: for my sake wear this;
It is a manacle of love; I'll place it
Upon this fairest prisoner.
O the gods!
When shall we see again?
Alack, the king!
Thou basest thing, avoid! hence, from my sight!
If after this command thou fraught the court
With thy unworthiness, thou diest: away!
Thou'rt poison to my blood.
The gods protect you!
And bless the good remainders of the court! I am gone.
There cannot be a pinch in death
More sharp than this is.
O disloyal thing,
That shouldst repair my youth, thou heap'st
A year's age on me.
I beseech you, sir,
Harm not yourself with your vexation
I am senseless of your wrath;
Past grace? obedience?
Past hope, and in despair; that way, past grace.
That mightst have had the sole son of my queen!
O blest, that I might not! I chose an eagle,
And did avoid a puttock.
Thou took'st a beggar; wouldst have made my throne
A seat for baseness.
No; I rather added
A lustre to it.
O thou vile one!
Sir, It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus:
You bred him as my playfellow, and he is
A man worth any woman, overbuys me
Almost the sum he pays.
What, art thou mad?
Almost, sir: heaven restore me! Would I were
A neat-herd's daughter, and my Leonatus
Our neighbour shepherd's son!
Thou foolish thing!
They were again together: you have done
Not after our command. Away with her,
And pen her up.
Beseech your patience. Peace,
Dear lady daughter, peace! Sweet sovereign,
Leave us to ourselves; and make yourself some comfort
Out of your best advice.
Nay, let her languish
A drop of blood a day; and, being aged,
Die of this folly!
Fie! you must give way.
Here is your servant. How now, sir! What news?
My lord your son drew on my master.
Ha! No harm, I trust, is done?
There might have been,
But that my master rather play'd than fought
And had no help of anger: they were parted
By gentlemen at hand.
I am very glad on't.
Why came you from your master?
On his command: he would not suffer me
To bring him to the haven; left these notes
Of what commands I should be subject to,
When 't pleased you to employ me.
I pray you, speak with me: you shall at least
Go see my lord aboard: for this time leave me.
If my shirt were bloody, then to shift it.
Have I hurt him?
No, 'faith; not so much as his patience.
Hurt him! his body's a passable carcass,
if he be not hurt: it is a thoroughfare for steel,
if it be not hurt.
The villain would not stand me.
No; but he fled forward still, toward your face.
Stand you! You have land enough of your own:
but he added to your having; gave you some ground.
I would they had not come between us.
And that she should love this fellow and refuse me!
Sir, as I told you always, her beauty and her brain
go not together: she's a good sign, but I have seen
small reflection of her wit.
She shines not upon fools,
lest the reflection should hurt her.
Come, I'll to my chamber.
Would there had been some hurt done!
I would thou grew'st unto the shores o' the haven,
And question'dst every sail: if he should write
And not have it, 'twere a paper lost,
As offer'd mercy is.
What was the last That he spake to thee?
It was his queen, his queen!
Then waved his handkerchief?
And kiss'd it, madam.
Senseless Linen! happier therein than I!
And that was all?
No, madam; for so long
As he could make me with this eye or ear
Distinguish him from others, he did keep
The deck, with glove, or hat, or handkerchief,
Still waving, as the fits and stirs of 's mind
Could best express how slow his soul sail'd on,
How swift his ship.
Thou shouldst have made him
As little as a crow, or less, ere left to after-eye him.
Madam, so I did.
I would have broke mine eye-strings; crack'd them,
but to look upon him, till the diminution
Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle,
Nay, follow'd him, till he had melted from
The smallness of a gnat to air, and then
Have turn'd mine eye and wept.
But, good Pisanio, When shall we hear from him?
Be assured, madam,
With his next vantage.
I did not take my leave of him, but had
Most pretty things to say: ere I could tell him
How I would think on him at certain hours
Such thoughts and such, or I could make him swear
The shes of Italy should not betray
Mine interest and his honour,
or have charged him,
At the sixth hour of morn, at noon, at midnight,
To encounter me with orisons, for then
I am in heaven for him; or ere I could
Give him that parting kiss which I had set
Betwixt two charming words,
comes in my father
And like the tyrannous breathing of the north
Shakes all our buds from growing.
The queen, madam,
Desires your highness' company.
Those things I bid you do, get them dispatch'd.
I will attend the queen.
Madam, I shall.
Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain:
he was then of a crescent note,
expected to prove so worthy
as since he hath been allowed the name of;
but I could then have looked on him without the help
of admiration, though the catalogue of his endowments
had been tabled by his side
and I to peruse him by items.
You speak of him when he was less furnished than now
he is with that which makes him
both without and within.
I have seen him in France: we had very many there
could behold the sun with as firm eyes as he.
This matter of marrying his king's daughter, wherein
he must be weighed rather by her value than his own,
words him, I doubt not, a great deal from the matter.
And then his banishment.
Ay, and the approbation of those that weep
this lamentable divorce under her colours are wonderfully
to extend him; be it but to fortify her judgment,
which else an easy battery might lay flat,
for taking a beggar without less quality.
But how comes it he is to sojourn with you?
How creeps acquaintance?
His father and I were soldiers together;
to whom I have been often bound
for no less than my life.
Here comes the Briton: let him be so entertained
amongst you as suits, with gentlemen
of your knowing, to a stranger of his quality.
I beseech you all, be better known
to this gentleman; whom I commend
to you as a noble friend of mine:
how worthy he is I will leave to appear hereafter,
rather than story him in his own hearing.
Sir, we have known together in Orleans.
Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies,
which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still.
Sir, you o'er-rate my poor kindness:
I was glad I did atone my countryman and you;
it had been pity
you should have been put together
with so mortal a purpose as then each bore,
upon importance of so slight and trivial a nature.
By your pardon, sir, I was then a young traveller;
rather shunned to go even with what I heard
than in my every action to be guided by others' experiences:
but upon my mended judgment--
if I offend not to say it is mended--
my quarrel was not altogether slight.
Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference?
Safely, I think: 'twas a contention in public,
which may, without contradiction,
suffer the report.
It was much like an argument that fell out last night,
where each of us fell in praise
of our country mistresses;
this gentleman at that time vouching--
and upon warrant of bloody affirmation--
his to be more fair, virtuous, wise,
chaste, constant-qualified and less attemptable
than any the rarest of our ladies in France.
That lady is not now living,
or this gentleman's opinion by this worn out.
She holds her virtue still and I my mind.
You must not so far prefer her 'fore ours of Italy.
Being so far provoked as I was in France,
I would abate her nothing,
though I profess myself her adorer, not her friend.
As fair and as good--
a kind of hand-in-hand comparison--
had been something too fair and too good
for any lady in Britain. If she went before others
I have seen, as that diamond of yours outlustres
many I have beheld. I could not but believe
she excelled many: but I have not seen
the most precious diamond that is, nor you the lady.
I praised her as I rated her: so do I my stone.
What do you esteem it at?
More than the world enjoys.
Either your unparagoned mistress is dead,
or she's outprized by a trifle.
You are mistaken: the one may be sold, or given,
if there were wealth enough for the purchase,
or merit for the gift: the other is not a thing for sale,
and only the gift of the gods.
Which the gods have given you?
Which, by their graces, I will keep.
You may wear her in title yours: but, you know,
strange fowl light upon neighbouring ponds.
Your ring may be stolen too: so your brace
of unprizable estimations; the one is but frail
and the other casual; a cunning thief,
or a that way accomplished courtier,
would hazard the winning both of first and last.
Your Italy contains none so accomplished a courtier
to convince the honour of my mistress,
if, in the holding or loss of that, you term her frail.
I do nothing doubt you have store of thieves;
notwithstanding, I fear not my ring.
Let us leave here, gentlemen.
Sir, with all my heart. This worthy signior,
I thank him, makes no stranger of me;
we are familiar at first.
With five times so much conversation, I should get
ground of your fair mistress,
make her go back, even to the yielding,
had I admittance and opportunity to friend.
No, no.
I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate
to your ring; which, in my opinion,
o'ervalues it something:
but I make my wager rather against your confidence
than her reputation:
and to bar your offence herein too,
I durst attempt it against any lady in the world.
You are a great deal abused
in too bold a persuasion;
Gentlemen, enough of this: it came in too suddenly;
let it die as it was born,
and, I pray you, be better acquainted.
Would I had put my estate and my neighbour's
on the approbation of what I have spoke!
What lady would you choose to assail?
Yours; whom in constancy you think stands so safe.
I will lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring,
commend me to the court where your lady is,
with no more advantage than the opportunity
of a second conference,
and I will bring from thence
that honour of hers which you imagine so reserved.
I will wage against your gold, gold to it:
my ring I hold dear as my finger; 'tis part of it.
You are afraid,
and therein the wiser.
If you buy ladies' flesh at a million a dram,
you cannot preserve it from tainting:
but I see you have some religion in you,
that you fear.
This is but a custom in your tongue;
you bear a graver purpose, I hope.
I am the master of my speeches, and would undergo
what's spoken, I swear.
Will you? I shall but lend my diamond till your return:
let there be covenants drawn between's:
my mistress exceeds in goodness
the hugeness of your unworthy thinking:
I dare you to this match: here's my ring.
I will have it no lay.
By the gods, it is one. If I bring you
no sufficient testimony that I have enjoyed the dearest
bodily part of your mistress,
my ten thousand ducats
are yours; so is your diamond too: if I come off,
and leave her in such honour as you have trust in,
she your jewel, this your jewel,
and my gold are yours:
provided I have your commendation
for my more free entertainment.
I embrace these conditions;
let us have articles betwixt us.
Only, thus far you shall answer:
if you make your voyage upon her and give me directly
to understand you have prevailed,
I am no further your enemy;
she is not worth our debate:
if she remain unseduced,
you not making it appear otherwise,
for your ill opinion and the assault you have made
to her chastity you shall answer me
with your sword.
Your hand; a covenant:
we will have these things
set down by lawful counsel, and straight away
for Britain, lest the bargain should catch cold
and starve.
Now, master doctor, have you brought those drugs?
Pleaseth your highness, ay: here they are, madam:
But I beseech your grace, without offence,--
My conscience bids me ask--wherefore you have
Commanded of me those most poisonous compounds,
Which are the movers of a languishing death;
But though slow, deadly?
I wonder, doctor,
Thou ask'st me such a question.
Have I not been Thy pupil long?
Hast thou not learn'd me how to make perfumes?
distil? preserve? yea, so
That our great king himself doth woo me oft
For my confections? Having thus far proceeded,--
Unless thou think'st me devilish--
is't not meet that I did amplify my judgment
in other conclusions?
I will try the forces
Of these thy compounds on such creatures
as we count not worth the hanging, but none human,
To try the vigour of them and apply
Allayments to their act, and by them gather
Their several virtues and effects.
Your highness
Shall from this practise but make hard your heart:
Besides, the seeing these effects will be
Both noisome and infectious.
O, content thee.
Here comes a flattering rascal;
upon him will I first work:
I do not like her. She doth think she has
Strange lingering poisons: I do know her spirit,
And will not trust one of her malice
with a drug of such damn'd nature.
Those she has will stupefy and dull the sense awhile;
Which first, perchance, she'll prove on cats and dogs,
Then afterward up higher: but there is no danger
in what show of death it makes,
More than the locking-up the spirits a time,
To be more fresh, reviving.
Weeps she still, say'st thou?
Dost thou think in time
She will not quench and let instructions enter
Where folly now possesses?
Do thou work:
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my son,
I'll tell thee on the instant thou art then
As great as is thy master,
greater,
for his fortunes all lie speechless and his name
Is at last gasp: return he cannot,
nor continue where he is: to shift his being
Is to exchange one misery with another,
And every day that comes comes to decay
A day's work in him.
What shalt thou expect,
To be depender on a thing that leans,
Who cannot be new built, nor has no friends,
So much as but to prop him?
Thou takest up
Thou know'st not what;
but take it for thy labour:
It is a thing I made, which hath the king
Five times redeem'd from death: I do not know
What is more cordial.
Nay, I prethee, take it;
It is an earnest of a further good
That I mean to thee.
Tell thy mistress how
The case stands with her;
do't as from thyself.
Think what a chance thou changest on, but think
Thou hast thy mistress still, to boot, my son,
Who shall take notice of thee:
I'll move the king
To any shape of thy preferment such
As thou'lt desire; and then myself, I chiefly,
That set thee on to this desert, am bound
To load thy merit richly.
Call my women:
Think on my words.
A sly and constant knave,
Not to be shaked; the agent for his master
And the remembrancer of her to hold
The hand-fast to her lord. I have given him that
Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her
Of liegers for her sweet, and which she after,
Except she bend her humour, shall be assured
To taste of too.
A father cruel, and a step-dame false;
A foolish suitor to a wedded lady,
That hath her husband banish'd;--O, that husband!
My supreme crown of grief! and those repeated
Vexations of it!
Had I been thief-stol'n,
As my two brothers, happy! but most miserable
Is the desire that's glorious: blest be those,
How mean soe'er, that have their honest wills,
Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie!
Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome,
Comes from my lord with letters.
Change you, madam?
The worthy Leonatus is in safety
And greets your highness dearly.
Thanks, good sir:
You're kindly welcome.
He is one of the noblest note,
to whose kindnesses I am most infinitely tied.
Reflect upon him accordingly, as you value your trust--
LEONATUS.'
So far I read aloud:
But even the very middle of my heart
Is warm'd by the rest, and takes it thankfully.
You are as welcome, worthy sir,
as I Have words to bid you, and shall find it so
In all that I can do.
Thanks, fairest lady.
What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes
To see this vaulted arch, and the rich crop
Of sea and land, which can distinguish 'twixt
The fiery orbs above and the twinn'd stones
Upon the number'd beach? and can we not
Partition make with spectacles so precious
'Twixt fair and foul?
What makes your admiration?
It cannot be i' the eye, for apes and monkeys
'Twixt two such shes would chatter this way
and contemn with mows the other; nor i' the judgment,
For idiots in this case of favour would
Be wisely definite; nor i' the appetite;
Sluttery to such neat excellence opposed
Should make desire vomit emptiness,
Not so allured to feed.
What is the matter, trow?
The cloyed will,
That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that tub
Both fill'd and running, ravening first the lamb
Longs after for the garbage.
What, dear sir,
Thus raps you? Are you well?
Thanks, madam; well.
Beseech you, sir, desire
My man's abode where I did leave him:
he Is strange and peevish.
I was going, sir,
To give him welcome.
Continues well my lord? His health, beseech you?
Well, madam.
Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is.
Exceeding pleasant; none a stranger there
So merry and so gamesome: he is call'd
The Briton reveller.
When he was here,
He did incline to sadness, and oft-times
Not knowing why.
I never saw him sad.
There is a Frenchman his companion, one
An eminent monsieur, that, it seems, much loves
A Gallian girl at home; he furnaces
The thick sighs from him, whiles the jolly Briton--
Your lord, I mean--laughs from's free lungs, cries 'O,
Can my sides hold, to think that man, who knows
By history, report, or his own proof,
What woman is, yea, what she cannot choose
But must be, will his free hours languish
for assured bondage?
Will my lord say so?
Ay, madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter:
It is a recreation to be by and hear him
mock the Frenchman. But, heavens know,
Some men are much to blame.
Not he, I hope.
Not he: but yet heaven's bounty towards him might
Be used more thankfully. In himself, 'tis much;
In you, which I account his beyond all talents,
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound
To pity too.
What do you pity, sir?
Two creatures heartily.
Am I one, sir?
You look on me:
what wreck discern you in me
Deserves your pity?
Lamentable! What,
To hide me from the radiant sun and solace
I' the dungeon by a snuff?
I pray you, sir,
Deliver with more openness your answers
To my demands. Why do you pity me?
That others do--
I was about to say--enjoy your--
But It is an office of the gods to venge it,
Not mine to speak on 't.
You do seem to know
Something of me, or what concerns me: pray you,--
Since doubling things go ill often hurts more
Than to be sure they do; for certainties
Either are past remedies, or, timely knowing,
The remedy then born--discover to me
What both you spur and stop.
Had I this cheek
To bathe my lips upon; this hand, whose touch,
Whose every touch, would force the feeler's soul
To the oath of loyalty; this object, which
Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye,
Fixing it only here; should I, damn'd then,
Slaver with lips as common as the stairs
That mount the Capitol; join gripes with hands
Made hard with hourly falsehood--falsehood, as
With labour; then by-peeping in an eye
Base and unlustrous as the smoky light
That's fed with stinking tallow; it were fit
That all the plagues of hell should at one time
Encounter such revolt.
My lord, I fear,
Has forgot Britain.
And himself. Not I,
Inclined to this intelligence, pronounce
The beggary of his change; but 'tis your graces
That from pay mutest conscience to my tongue
Charms this report out.
Let me hear no more.
O dearest soul! your cause doth strike my heart
With pity, that doth make me sick. A lady
So fair, and fasten'd to an empery,
Would make the great'st king double,--to be partner'd
With tomboys hired with that self-exhibition
Which your own coffers yield! with diseased ventures
That play with all infirmities for gold
Which rottenness can lend nature! such boil'd stuff
As well might poison poison! Be revenged;
Or she that bore you was no queen, and you
Recoil from your great stock.
Revenged!
How should I be revenged? If this be true,--
As I have such a heart that both mine ears
Must not in haste abuse--if it be true,
How should I be revenged?
Should he make me
Live, like Diana's priest, betwixt cold sheets,
Whiles he is vaulting variable ramps,
In your despite, upon your purse? Revenge it.
I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure,
More noble than that runagate to your bed,
And will continue fast to your affection,
Still close as sure.
What, ho, Pisanio!
Let me my service tender on your lips.
Away! I do condemn mine ears that have
So long attended thee. If thou wert honourable,
Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue, not
For such an end thou seek'st,--as base as strange.
Thou wrong'st a gentleman, who is as far
From thy report as thou from honour, and
Solicit'st here a lady that disdains
both thee and the devil alike. What ho, Pisanio!
The king my father shall be made acquainted
Of thy assault: if he shall think it fit,
A saucy stranger in his court to mart
As in a Romish stew and to expound
His beastly mind to us, he hath a court
He little cares for and a daughter who
He not respects at all. What, ho, Pisanio!
O happy Leonatus! I may say
The credit that thy lady hath of thee
Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness
Her assured credit. Blessed live you long!
A lady to the worthiest sir that ever
Country call'd his! and you his mistress, only
For the most worthiest fit!
Give me your pardon.
I have spoke this, to know if your affiance
Were deeply rooted; and shall make your lord,
That which he is, new o'er: and he is one
The truest manner'd; such a holy witch
That he enchants societies into him;
Half all men's hearts are his.
You make amends.
He sits 'mongst men like a descended god:
He hath a kind of honour sets him off,
More than a mortal seeming. Be not angry,
Most mighty princess, that I have adventured
To try your taking a false report; which hath
Honour'd with confirmation your great judgment
In the election of a sir so rare,
Which you know cannot err: the love I bear him
Made me to fan you thus, but the gods made you,
Unlike all others, chaffless. Pray, your pardon.
All's well, sir:
take my power i' the court for yours.
My humble thanks.
I had almost forgot
To entreat your grace but in a small request,
And yet of moment to, for it concerns
Your lord; myself and other noble friends,
Are partners in the business.
Pray, what is't?
Some dozen Romans of us and your lord--
The best feather of our wing--have mingled sums
To buy a present for the emperor
Which I, the factor for the rest, have done
In France: 'tis plate of rare device, and jewels
Of rich and exquisite form; their values great;
And I am something curious, being strange,
To have them in safe stowage: may it please you
To take them in protection?
Willingly;
And pawn mine honour for their safety: since
My lord hath interest in them, I will keep them
In my bedchamber.
They are in a trunk,
Attended by my men: I will make bold
To send them to you, only for this night;
I must aboard to-morrow.
O, no, no.
Yes, I beseech; or I shall short my word
By lengthening my return. From Gallia
I cross'd the seas on purpose and on promise
To see your grace.
I thank you for your pains:
pox on't! I had rather not be so noble as I am;
they dare not fight with me, because of the queen
my mother: every Jack-slave hath his bellyful
of fighting, and I must go up and down like a cock
that nobody can match.
Sayest thou?
It is not fit your lordship should undertake
every companion that you give offence to.
No, I know that: but it is fit I should commit
offence to my inferiors.
Ay, it is fit for your lordship only.
Why, so I say.
Did you hear of a stranger that's come to court to-night?
A stranger, and I not know on't!
There's an Italian come; and, 'tis thought,
one of Leonatus' friends.
Leonatus! a banished rascal; and he's another,
whatsoever he be. Who told you of this stranger?
One of your lordship's pages.
Is it fit I went to look upon him?
is there no derogation in't?
You cannot derogate, my lord.
Not easily, I think.
Come, I'll go see this Italian: Come, go.
I'll attend your lordship.
That such a crafty devil as is his mother
Should yield the world this ass! a woman that
Bears all down with her brain; and this her son
Cannot take two from twenty, for his heart,
And leave eighteen.
Who's there? my woman Helen?
Please you, madam
What hour is it?
Almost midnight, madam.
I have read three hours then: mine eyes are weak:
Fold down the leaf where I have left: to bed:
Take not away the taper, leave it burning;
And if thou canst awake by four o' the clock,
I prithee, call me.
Sleep hath seized me wholly
To your protection I commend me, gods.
From fairies and the tempters of the night
Guard me, beseech ye.
The crickets sing, and man's o'er-labour'd sense
Repairs itself by rest.
Our Tarquin thus
Did softly press the rushes, ere he waken'd
The chastity he wounded.
Cytherea,
How bravely thou becomest thy bed, fresh lily,
And whiter than the sheets! That I might touch!
But kiss; one kiss! Rubies unparagon'd,
How dearly they do't! 'Tis her breathing that
Perfumes the chamber thus: the flame o' the taper
Bows toward her, and would under-peep her lids,
To see the enclosed lights, now canopied
Under these windows, white and azure laced
With blue of heaven's own tinct. But my design,
To note the chamber: I will write all down:
Such and such pictures; there the window;
such the adornment of her bed; the arras; figures,
Why, such and such; and the contents o' the story.
Ah, but some natural notes about her body,
Above ten thousand meaner moveables
Would testify, to enrich mine inventory.
O sleep, thou ape of death, lie dull upon her!
And be her sense but as a monument,
Thus in a chapel lying!
Come off, come off:
As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard!
'Tis mine; and this will witness outwardly,
As strongly as the conscience does within,
To the madding of her lord.
On her left breast
A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops
I' the bottom of a cowslip: here's a voucher,
Stronger than ever law could make:
this secret will force him think
I have pick'd the lock and ta'en
The treasure of her honour.
No more. To what end?
Why should I write this down, that's riveted,
Screw'd to my memory?
She hath been reading late
The tale of Tereus; here the leaf's turn'd down
Where Philomel gave up.
I have enough:
To the trunk again, and shut the spring of it.
Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning
May bare the raven's eye!
I lodge in fear;
Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.
(Clock strikes)
One, two, three: time, time!
It's almost morning, is't not?
Day, my lord.
I am advised to give this foolish Imogen
music o' mornings; they say it will penetrate.
Come on; tune: if you can penetrate her
with your fingering, so; we'll try with tongue too:
Hark, hark! the lark at heaven's gate sings,
And Phoebus 'gins arise,
And winking Mary-buds begin
To ope their golden eyes:
With every thing that pretty is,
My lady sweet, arise:
Arise, arise.
Attend you here the door of our stern daughter?
Will she not forth?
I have assailed her with music,
but she vouchsafes no notice.
The exile of her minion is too new;
She hath not yet forgot him: some more time
Must wear the print of his remembrance out,
And then she's yours.
You are most bound to the king,
Who lets go by no vantages that may
Prefer you to his daughter.
So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome;
The one is Caius Lucius.
A worthy fellow,
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now;
But that's no fault of his:
Our dear son,
When you have given good morning to your mistress,
Attend the queen and us; we shall have need
To employ you towards this Roman. Come, our queen.
If she be up, I'll speak with her; if not,
Let her lie still and dream.
By your leave, ho!
Good morrow, fairest: sister, your sweet hand.
Good morrow, sir. You lay out too much pains
For purchasing but trouble; the thanks I give
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks
And scarce can spare them.
Still, I swear I love you.
If you but said so, 'twere as deep with me:
If you swear still, your recompense is still
That I regard it not.
This is no answer.
But that you shall not say I yield being silent,
I would not speak. I pray you, spare me: 'faith,
I shall unfold equal discourtesy
To your best kindness: one of your great knowing
Should learn, being taught, forbearance.
To leave you in your madness, 'twere my sin:
I will not.
Fools are not mad folks.
Do you call me fool?
As I am mad, I do:
If you'll be patient, I'll no more be mad;
That cures us both. I am much sorry, sir,
You put me to forget a lady's manners,
By being so verbal: and learn now, for all,
That I, which know my heart, do here pronounce,
By the very truth of it, I care not for you,
And am so near the lack of charity--
To accuse myself--I hate you; which I had rather
You felt than make't my boast.
You sin against obedience,
which you owe your father.
For the contract you pretend with that base wretch,
One bred of alms and foster'd with cold dishes,
With scraps o' the court, it is no contract, none:
And though it be allow'd in meaner parties--
Yet who than he more mean?--to knit their souls,
On whom there is no more dependency
But brats and beggary, in self-figured knot;
Yet you are curb'd from that enlargement
by the consequence o' the crown, and must not soil
The precious note of it with a base slave.
A hilding for a livery, a squire's cloth,
A pantler, not so eminent.
Profane fellow
Wert thou the son of Jupiter and no more
But what thou art besides, thou wert too base
To be his groom: thou wert dignified enough,
Even to the point of envy, if 'twere made
Comparative for your virtues, to be styled
The under-hangman of his kingdom, and hated
For being preferred so well.
The south-fog rot him!
He never can meet more mischance than come
To be but named of thee. His meanest garment,
That ever hath but clipp'd his body, is dearer
In my respect than all the hairs above thee,
Were they all made such men. How now, Pisanio!
'His garment!' Now the devil--
To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently--
'His garment!'
I am sprited with a fool.
Frighted, and anger'd worse: go bid my woman
Search for a jewel that too casually
Hath left mine arm: it was thy master's: 'shrew me,
If I would lose it for a revenue
Of any king's in Europe. I do think
I saw't this morning:
confident I am Last night 'twas on mine arm; I kiss'd it:
I hope it be not gone to tell my lord
That I kiss aught but he.
'Twill not be lost.
I hope so: go and search.
You have abused me:
'His meanest garment!'
Ay, I said so, sir:
If you will make't an action, call witness to't.
I will inform your father.
Your mother too:
She's my good lady, and will conceive, I hope,
But the worst of me. So, I leave you, sir,
To the worst of discontent.
I'll be revenged:
'His meanest garment!' Well.
Fear it not, sir: I would I were so sure
To win the king as I am bold her honour
Will remain hers.
What means do you make to him?
Not any, but abide the change of time,
Quake in the present winter's state and wish
That warmer days would come: in these sear'd hopes,
I barely gratify your love; they failing,
I must die much your debtor.
Your very goodness and your company
O'erpays all I can do. By this, your king
Hath heard of great Augustus: Caius Lucius
Will do's commission throughly: and I think
He'll grant the tribute, send the arrearages,
Or look upon our Romans, whose remembrance
Is yet fresh in their grief.
I do believe,
Statist though I am none, nor like to be,
That this will prove a war; and you shall hear
The legions now in Gallia sooner landed
In our not-fearing Britain than have tidings
Of any penny tribute paid. Our countrymen
Are men more order'd than when Julius Caesar
Smiled at their lack of skill, but found
their courage
Worthy his frowning at: their discipline,
Now mingled with their courages, will make known
To their approvers they are people such
That mend upon the world.
See! Iachimo!
The swiftest harts have posted you by land;
And winds of all the comers kiss'd your sails,
To make your vessel nimble.
Welcome, sir.
I hope the briefness of your answer made
The speediness of your return.
Your lady
Is one of the fairest that I have look'd upon.
And therewithal the best; or let her beauty
Look through a casement to allure false hearts
And be false with them.
Here are letters for you.
Their tenor good, I trust.
'Tis very like.
Was Caius Lucius in the Britain court
When you were there?
He was expected then,
But not approach'd.
All is well yet.
Sparkles this stone as it was wont? or is't not
Too dull for your good wearing?
If I had lost it,
I should have lost the worth of it in gold.
I'll make a journey twice as far, to enjoy
A second night of such sweet shortness which
Was mine in Britain, for the ring is won.
The stone's too hard to come by.
Not a whit,
Your lady being so easy.
Make not, sir,
Your loss your sport: I hope you know that we
Must not continue friends.
Good sir, we must,
If you keep covenant. Had I not brought
The knowledge of your mistress home, I grant
We were to question further: but I now
Profess myself the winner of her honour,
Together with your ring; and not the wronger
Of her or you, having proceeded but
By both your wills.
If you can make't apparent
That you have tasted her in bed, my hand
And ring is yours; if not, the foul opinion
You had of her pure honour gains or loses
Your sword or mine, or masterless leaves both
To who shall find them.
Sir, my circumstances,
Being so near the truth as I will make them,
Must first induce you to believe: whose strength
I will confirm with oath; which, I doubt not,
You'll give me leave to spare, when you shall find
You need it not.
Proceed.
First, her bedchamber,--
Where, I confess, I slept not, but profess
Had that was well worth watching--it was hang'd
With tapesty of silk and silver; the story
Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman,
And Cydnus swell'd above the banks, or for
The press of boats or pride: a piece of work
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive
In workmanship and value; which I wonder'd
Could be so rarely and exactly wrought,
Since the true life on't was--
This is true;
And this you might have heard of here, by me,
Or by some other.
More particulars
Must justify my knowledge.
So they must,
Or do your honour injury.
The chimney
Is south the chamber, and the chimney-piece
Chaste Dian bathing: never saw I figures
So likely to report themselves: the cutter
Was as another nature, dumb; outwent her,
Motion and breath left out.
This is a thing
Which you might from relation likewise reap,
Being, as it is, much spoke of.
The roof o' the chamber
With golden cherubins is fretted: her andirons--
I had forgot them--were two winking Cupids
Of silver, each on one foot standing, nicely
Depending on their brands.
This is her honour!
Let it be granted you have seen all this--and praise
Be given to your remembrance--the description
Of what is in her chamber nothing saves
The wager you have laid.
Then, if you can,
Be pale: I beg but leave to air this jewel; see!
And now 'tis up again: it must be married
To that your diamond; I'll keep them.
Jove!
Once more let me behold it:
is it that which I left with her?
Sir--I thank her--that:
She stripp'd it from her arm; I see her yet;
Her pretty action did outsell her gift,
And yet enrich'd it too: she gave it me, and said
She prized it once.
May be she pluck'd it off
To send it me.
She writes so to you, doth she?
O, no, no, no! 'tis true.
Here, take this too;
It is a basilisk unto mine eye,
Kills me to look on't. Let there be no honour
Where there is beauty; truth, where semblance; love,
Where there's another man: the vows of women
Of no more bondage be, to where they are made,
Than they are to their virtues; which is nothing.
O, above measure false!
Have patience, sir,
And take your ring again; 'tis not yet won:
It may be probable she lost it;
or who knows if one of her women, being corrupted,
Hath stol'n it from her?
Very true;
And so, I hope, he came by't. Back my ring:
Render to me some corporal sign about her,
More evident than this; for this was stolen.
By Jupiter, I had it from her arm.
Hark you, he swears; by Jupiter he swears.
'Tis true:--nay, keep the ring--'tis true: I am sure
She would not lose it: her attendants are all
sworn and honourable:--they induced to steal it!
And by a stranger!--No, he hath enjoyed her:
The cognizance of her incontinency
Is this: she hath bought the name of whore
thus dearly.
There, take thy hire; and all the fiends of hell
Divide themselves between you!
Sir, be patient:
This is not strong enough to be believed
Of one persuaded well of--
Never talk on't;
She hath been colted by him.
If you seek
For further satisfying, under her breast--
Worthy the pressing--lies a mole, right proud
Of that most delicate lodging:
I kiss'd it; and it gave me present hunger
To feed again, though full. You do remember
This stain upon her?
Ay, and it doth confirm
Another stain, as big as hell can hold,
Were there no more but it.
Will you hear more?
Spare your arithmetic: never count the turns;
Once, and a million!
I'll be sworn--
No swearing.
If you will swear you have not done't, you lie;
And I will kill thee, if thou dost deny
Thou'st made me cuckold.
I'll deny nothing.
O, that I had her here, to tear her limb-meal!
I will go there and do't, i' the court,
before her father. I'll do something--
Quite besides
The government of patience! You have won:
Let's follow him, and pervert the present wrath
He hath against himself.
With all my heart.
Is there no way for men to be but women
Must be half-workers? We are all bastards;
And that most venerable man which I
Did call my father, was I know not where
When I was stamp'd; some coiner with his tools
Made me a counterfeit: yet my mother seem'd
The Dian of that time so doth my wife
The nonpareil of this. O, vengeance, vengeance!
Me of my lawful pleasure she restrain'd
And pray'd me oft forbearance; did it with
A pudency so rosy the sweet view on't
Might well have warm'd old Saturn; that I thought her
As chaste as unsunn'd snow. O, all the devils!
This yellow Iachimo, in an hour,--wast not?--
Or less,--at first?--perchance he spoke not, but,
Like a full-acorn'd boar, a German one,
Cried 'O!' and mounted; found no opposition
But what he look'd for should oppose and she
Should from encounter guard. Could I find out
The woman's part in me! For there's no motion
That tends to vice in man, but I affirm
It is the woman's part: be it lying, note it,
The woman's; flattering, hers; deceiving, hers;
Lust and rank thoughts, hers, hers; revenges, hers;
Ambitions, covetings, change of prides, disdain,
Nice longing, slanders, mutability,
All faults that may be named, nay, that hell knows,
Why, hers, in part or all; but rather, all;
For even to vice
They are not constant but are changing still
One vice, but of a minute old, for one
Not half so old as that. I'll write against them,
Detest them, curse them: yet 'tis greater skill
In a true hate, to pray they have their will:
The very devils cannot plague them better.
Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?
When Julius Caesar, whose remembrance yet
Lives in men's eyes and will to ears and tongues
Be theme and hearing ever, was in this Britain
And conquer'd it, Cassibelan, thine uncle,--
Famous in Caesar's praises, no whit less
Than in his feats deserving it--for him
And his succession granted Rome a tribute,
Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately
Is left untender'd.
And, to kill the marvel,
Shall be so ever.
There be many Caesars,
Ere such another Julius. Britain is
A world by itself; and we will nothing pay
For wearing our own noses.
That opportunity
Which then they had to take from 's, to resume
We have again. Remember, sir, my liege,
The kings your ancestors, together with
The natural bravery of your isle, which stands
As Neptune's park, ribbed and paled in
With rocks unscalable and roaring waters,
With sands that will not bear your enemies' boats,
But suck them up to the topmast. A kind of conquest
Caesar made here; but made not here his brag
Of 'Came' and 'saw' and 'overcame: ' with shame--
That first that ever touch'd him--he was carried
From off our coast, twice beaten; and his shipping--
Poor ignorant baubles!-- upon our terrible seas,
Like egg-shells moved upon their surges, crack'd
As easily 'gainst our rocks: for joy whereof
The famed Cassibelan, who was once at point--
O giglot fortune!--to master Caesar's sword,
Made Lud's town with rejoicing fires bright
And Britons strut with courage.
Come, there's no more tribute to be paid:
our kingdom is stronger than it was at that time; and,
as I said, there is no moe such Caesars:
other of them may have crook'd noses, but to owe such
straight arms, none.
Son, let your mother end.
We have yet many among us can gripe as hard
as Cassibelan: I do not say I am one; but I have a hand.
Why tribute? why should we pay tribute?
If Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket,
or put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute
for light; else, sir, no more tribute, pray you now.
You must know,
Till the injurious Romans did extort
This tribute from us, we were free:
Caesar's ambition,
Which swell'd so much that it did almost stretch
The sides o' the world, against all colour here
Did put the yoke upon 's; which to shake off
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
Ourselves to be.
I am sorry, Cymbeline,
That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar--
Caesar, that hath more kings his servants than
Thyself domestic officers--thine enemy:
Receive it from me, then: war and confusion
In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee:
look for fury not to be resisted.
Thus defied, I thank thee for myself.
How? of adultery? Wherefore write you not
What monster's her accuser? Leonatus,
O master! what a strange infection
Is fall'n into thy ear! What false Italian,
As poisonous-tongued as handed, hath prevail'd
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal! No:
She's punish'd for her truth, and undergoes,
More goddess-like than wife-like, such assaults
As would take in some virtue. O my master!
Thy mind to her is now as low as were
Thy fortunes. How! that I should murder her?
Upon the love and truth and vows which I
Have made to thy command? I, her? her blood?
If it be so to do good service, never
Let me be counted serviceable. How look I,
That I should seem to lack humanity
so much as this fact comes to?
'Do't: the letter
that I have sent her, by her own command
Shall give thee opportunity.' O damn'd paper!
Black as the ink that's on thee! Senseless bauble,
Art thou a feodary for this act, and look'st
So virgin-like without? Lo, here she comes.
I am ignorant in what I am commanded.
How now, Pisanio!
Madam, here is a letter from my lord.
'Justice, and your father's wrath, should he take me
in his dominion, could not be so cruel to me,
as you, O the dearest of creatures,
would even renew me with your eyes.
Take notice that I am in Cambria,
at Milford-Haven: what your own love
will out of this advise you, follow.
So he wishes you all happiness,
that remains loyal to his vow, and your,
increasing in love,
LEONATUS POSTHUMUS.'
O, for a horse with wings! Hear'st thou, Pisanio?
He is at Milford-Haven: read, and tell me
How far 'tis thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day?
Prithee, speak,
How many score of miles may we well ride
'Twixt hour and hour?
One score 'twixt sun and sun,
Madam, 's enough for you:
and too much too.
Why, one that rode to's execution, man,
Could never go so slow:
But this is foolery:
Go bid my woman feign a sickness;
say she'll home to her father: and provide me presently
A riding-suit, no costlier than would fit
A franklin's housewife.
Madam, you're best consider.
I see before me, man: nor here, nor here,
Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them,
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee;
Do as I bid thee: there's no more to say,
Accessible is none but Milford way.
A goodly day not to keep house, with such
Whose roof's as low as ours! Stoop, boys; this gate
Instructs you how to adore the heavens and bows you
To a morning's holy office: the gates of monarchs
Are arch'd so high that giants may jet through
And keep their impious turbans on, without
Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven!
Now for our mountain sport: up to yond hill;
Your legs are young; I'll tread these flats.
Consider, when you above perceive me like a crow,
That it is place which lessens and sets off;
And you may then revolve what tales I have told you
Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war:
Out of your proof you speak: we, poor unfledged,
Have never wing'd from view o' the nest, nor know not
What air's from home. Haply this life is best,
If quiet life be best; sweeter to you
That have a sharper known; well corresponding
With your stiff age: but unto us it is
A cell of ignorance; travelling a-bed;
A prison for a debtor, that not dares
To stride a limit.
What should we speak of
When we are old as you? when we shall hear
The rain and wind beat dark December, how,
In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing;
We are beastly.
How you speak!
Did you but know the city's usuries
And felt them knowingly; the art o' the court
As hard to leave as keep; whose top to climb
Is certain falling, or so slippery that
The fear's as bad as falling; the toil o' the war,
O boys, this story
The world may read in me: my body's mark'd
With Roman swords, and my report was once
First with the best of note: Cymbeline loved me,
And when a soldier was the theme, my name
Was not far off: then was I as a tree
Whose boughs did bend with fruit: but in one night,
A storm or robbery, call it what you will,
Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves,
And left me bare to weather.
Uncertain favour!
My fault being nothing--as I have told you oft--
But that two villains, whose false oaths prevail'd
Before my perfect honour, swore to Cymbeline
I was confederate with the Romans: so
Follow'd my banishment, and this twenty years
This rock and these demesnes have been my world;
But up to the mountains!
This is not hunters' language:
How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
These boys know little they are sons to the king;
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
They think they are mine;
This Polydore,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
The king his father call'd Guiderius,--Jove!
When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
Into my story: say 'Thus, mine enemy fell,
And thus I set my foot on 's neck;' even then
The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,
Strains his young nerves and puts himself in posture
That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal,
Once Arviragus, in as like a figure,
Strikes life into my speech and shows much more
His own conceiving.--Hark, the game is roused!
O Cymbeline! heaven and my conscience knows
Thou didst unjustly banish me: whereon,
At three and two years old, I stole these babes;
Thinking to bar thee of succession,
as Thou reft'st me of my lands.
Euriphile, Thou wast their nurse;
they took thee for their mother,
And every day do honour to her grave:
Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan call'd,
They take for natural father.
The game is up.
Where is Posthumus?
What is in thy mind,
That makes thee stare thus?
One, but painted thus,
Would be interpreted a thing perplex'd
Beyond self-explication:
What's the matter. man?
Why tender'st thou that paper to me, with
A look untender?
My husband's hand!
That drug-damn'd Italy hath out-craftied him,
And he's at some hard point. Speak, man: thy tongue
May take off some extremity, which to read
Would be even mortal to me.
Please you, read;
And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing
The most disdain'd of fortune.
'Thy mistress, Pisanio, hath played
the strumpet in my bed; the testimonies whereof
lie bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak surmises,
but from proof as strong as my grief and as certain
as I expect my revenge. That part thou, Pisanio,
must act for me, if thy faith be not tainted with
the breach of hers. Let thine own hands take away
her life:
I shall give thee opportunity
at Milford-Haven. She hath my letter for the purpose
where, if thou fear to strike and to make me certain
it is done, thou art the pandar to her dishonour
and equally to me disloyal.'
What shall I need to draw my sword? the paper
Hath cut her throat already.
False to his bed! What is it to be false?
To lie in watch there and to think on him?
To weep 'twixt clock and clock?
if sleep charge nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him
And cry myself awake? that's false to's bed, is it?
Alas, good lady!
I false! Thy conscience witness: Iachimo,
Thou didst accuse him of incontinency;
Thou then look'dst like a villain; now methinks
Thy favour's good enough.
Some jay of Italy
Whose mother was her painting, hath betray'd him:
Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion;
And, for I am richer than to hang by the walls,
I must be ripp'd:--to pieces with me!--O,
Men's vows are women's traitors!
All good seeming,
By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought
Put on for villany; not born where't grows,
But worn a bait for ladies.
Good madam, hear me.
Come, fellow, be thou honest:
Do thou thy master's bidding: when thou see'st him,
A little witness my obedience: look!
I draw the sword myself: take it,
and hit the innocent mansion of my love, my heart;
Fear not; 'tis empty of all things but grief;
Thy master is not there, who was indeed
The riches of it:
do his bidding; strike!
Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause;
But now thou seem'st a coward.
Hence, vile instrument!
Thou shalt not damn my hand.
Why, I must die;
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
No servant of thy master's.
Come, here's my heart.
Something's afore't. Soft, soft! we'll no defence;
Obedient as the scabbard. What is here?
The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus,
All turn'd to heresy? Away, away,
Corrupters of my faith! you shall no more
Be stomachers to my heart. Thus may poor fools
Believe false teachers:
though those that are betray'd
Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor
Stands in worse case of woe.
And thou, Posthumus,
Come, strike!
The lamb entreats the butcher: where's thy knife?
Thou art too slow to do thy master's bidding,
When I desire it too.
O gracious lady,
Since I received command to do this business
I have not slept one wink.
Do't, and to bed then.
I'll wake mine eye-balls blind first.
Wherefore then didst undertake it?
Why hast thou abused
So many miles with a pretence?
But to win time
To lose so bad employment; in the which
I have consider'd of a course. Good lady,
Hear me with patience.
Talk thy tongue weary;
I have heard I am a strumpet; and mine ear
Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
Nor tent to bottom that.
But speak.
It cannot be
But that my master is abused:
Some villain, ay, and singular in his art.
Hath done you both this cursed injury.
Some Roman courtezan.
No, on my life.
I'll give but notice you are dead and send him
Some bloody sign of it; for 'tis commanded
I should do so: you shall be miss'd at court,
And that will well confirm it.
What shall I do the where? where bide? how live?
Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford-Haven
To-morrow: now, if you could wear a mind
Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise
That which, to appear itself, must not yet be
But by self-danger, you should tread a course
Pretty and full of view; yea, haply, near
The residence of Posthumus;
O, for such means! I would adventure.
Well, then, here's the point:
You must forget to be a woman;
change command into obedience: fear and niceness
into a waggish courage:
I see into thy end, and am almost
A man already.
First, make yourself but like one.
Fore-thinking this, I have already fit--
'Tis in my cloak-bag--doublet, hat, hose, all
That answer to them:
'fore noble Lucius
Present yourself, desire his service, tell him
wherein you're happy,
With joy he will embrace you, for he's honourable
Thou art all the comfort
The gods will diet me with.
This attempt I am soldier to, and will abide it
with a prince's courage. Away, I prithee.
Well, madam, we must take a short farewell,
Lest, being miss'd, I be suspected
of your carriage from the court.
My noble mistress,
Here is a box; I had it from the queen:
What's in't is precious; if you are sick at sea,
Or stomach-qualm'd at land, a dram of this
Will drive away distemper.
To some shade,
And fit you to your manhood.
May the gods direct you to the best!
Amen: I thank thee.
Thanks, royal sir.
My emperor hath wrote, I must from hence;
And am right sorry that I must report ye
My master's enemy.
Our subjects, sir,
Will not endure his yoke; and for ourself
To show less sovereignty than they, must needs
Appear unkinglike.
So, sir: I desire of you
A conduct over-land to Milford-Haven.
Madam, all joy befal your grace!
And you!
My lords, you are appointed for that office;
The due of honour in no point omit.
So farewell, noble Lucius.
Your hand, my lord.
Receive it friendly; but from this time forth
I wear it as your enemy.
Sir, the event
Is yet to name the winner: fare you well.
Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords,
Till he have cross'd the Severn. Happiness!
He goes hence frowning: but it honours us
That we have given him cause.
'Tis all the better;
Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.
Lucius hath wrote already to the emperor
How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
Our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness:
The powers that he already hath in Gallia
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
His war for Britain.
'Tis not sleepy business;
But must be look'd to speedily and strongly.
Our expectation that it would be thus
Hath made us forward. But, my gentle queen,
Where is our daughter? She hath not appear'd
Before the Roman, nor to us hath tender'd
The duty of the day: she looks us like
A thing more made of malice than of duty:
We have noted it. Call her before us; for
We have been too slight in sufferance.
Royal sir,
Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired
Hath her life been; the cure whereof, my lord,
'Tis time must do. Beseech your majesty,
Forbear sharp speeches to her: she's a lady
So tender of rebukes that words are strokes
And strokes death to her.
Where is she, sir?
How can her contempt be answer'd?
Please you, sir,
Her chambers are all lock'd; and there's no answer
That will be given to the loudest noise we make.
My lord, when last I went to visit her,
She pray'd me to excuse her keeping close,
Whereto constrain'd by her infirmity,
She should that duty leave unpaid to you,
Which daily she was bound to proffer:
This she wish'd me to make known; but our great court
Made me to blame in memory.
Her doors lock'd?
Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I fear
Prove false!
Son, I say, follow the king.
That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant,
have not seen these two days.
Go, look after.
Pisanio, thou that stand'st so for Posthumus!
He hath a drug of mine; I pray his absence
Proceed by swallowing that, for he believes
It is a thing most precious.
But for her, where is she gone?
Haply, despair hath seized her,
Or, wing'd with fervor of her love, she's flown
To her desired Posthumus: gone she is
To death or to dishonour; and my end
Can make good use of either:
She being down, I have the placing of the British crown.
How now, my son!
'Tis certain she is fled.
Go in and cheer the king: he rages;
none dare come about him.
All the better: may this night forestall him
of the coming day!
I love and hate her: for she's fair and royal,
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
Than lady, ladies, woman; from every one
The best she hath, and she, of all compounded,
Outsells them all; I love her therefore:
but disdaining me and throwing favours on
The low Posthumus slanders so her judgment
That what's else rare is choked; and in that point
I will conclude to hate her, nay, indeed,
To be revenged upon her. For when fools Shall--
Who is here?
What, are you packing, sirrah?
Come hither:
ah, you precious pander!
Villain, Where is thy lady? In a word; or else
Thou art straightway with the fiends.
O, good my lord!
Where is thy lady? Is she with Posthumus?
From whose so many weights of baseness cannot
A dram of worth be drawn.
O, my all-worthy lord!
All-worthy villain!
Discover where thy mistress is at once,
At the next word: no more of 'worthy lord!'
Speak, or thy silence on the instant is
Thy condemnation and thy death.
Then, sir,
This paper is the history of my knowledge
Touching her flight.
Let's see't. I will pursue her
Even to Augustus' throne.
I'll write to my lord she's dead. O Imogen,
Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!
Sirrah, is this letter true?
Sir, as I think.
It is Posthumus' hand; I know't.
Sirrah, if thou wouldst not be a villain,
but do me true service,
undergo those employments wherein I should have
cause to use thee with a serious industry,
that is, what villany soe'er I bid thee do, to perform it
directly and truly, I would think thee an honest man:
thou shouldst neither want my means
for thy relief nor my voice for thy preferment.
Well, my good lord.
Wilt thou serve me? for since patiently
and constantly thou hast stuck to the bare fortune
of that beggar Posthumus, thou canst not,
in the course of gratitude, but be a diligent follower
of mine: wilt thou serve me?
Sir, I will.
Give me thy hand; here's my purse.
Hast any of thy late master's garments in thy possession?
I have, my lord, at my lodging, the same suit
he wore when he took leave of my lady and mistress.
The first service thou dost me, fetch that suit hither:
let it be thy lint service; go.
I shall, my lord.
Meet thee at Milford-Haven!--
I forgot to ask him one thing;
I'll remember't anon:--
even there, thou villain Posthumus, will I kill thee.
I would these garments were come.
She said upon a time--the bitterness of it
I now belch from my heart--that she
held the very garment of Posthumus in more respect
than my noble and natural person together
with the adornment of my qualities.
With that suit upon my back,
will I ravish her:
Be those the garments?
Ay, my noble lord.
How long is't since she went to Milford-Haven?
She can scarce be there yet.
Bring this apparel to my chamber;
that is the second thing that I have commanded thee:
the third is,
that thou wilt be a voluntary mute to my design.
Thou bid'st me to my loss: for true to thee
Were to prove false, which I will never be,
How fit his garments serve me.
Why should his mistress
who was made by him  that made the tailor
not be fit too?
I dare speak it to myself
where it is not vain glory
for a man and his glass to confer
in his own chambers.
The lines of my body are as well-drawn as his,
no less young, more strong,
not beneath him in fortunes,
beyond him in the advantage of the time
above him in birth
alike conversant in general services
and more remarkable in single oppositions.
Yet this imperceiverant thing loves him in my despite.
What mortality is!
Stay; come not in.
But that it eats our victuals, I should think
Here were a fairy.
What's the matter, sir?
By Jupiter, an angel! or, if not,
An earthly paragon!
Good masters, harm me not:
I have stol'n nought, nor would not, though I had found
Gold strew'd i' the floor. Here's money for my meat:
I would have left it on the board so soon
As I had made my meal, and parted
With prayers for the provider.
Money, youth?
All gold and silver rather turn to dirt!
As 'tis no better reckon'd, but of those
Who worship dirty gods.
I see you're angry:
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should
Have died had I not made it.
Whither bound?
To Milford-Haven.
What's your name?
Fidele, sir.
I have a kinsman who Is bound for Italy;
he embark'd at Milford;
To whom being going, almost spent with hunger,
I am fall'n in this offence.
Prithee, fair youth,
Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds
By this rude place we live in. Well encounter'd!
'Tis almost night: you shall have better cheer
Ere you depart: and thanks to stay and eat it.
Boys, bid him welcome.
I'll love him as my brother:
And such a welcome as I'd give to him
After long absence, such is yours: most welcome!
The night to the owl and morn to the lark
less welcome.
Posthumus, thy head, which now is growing upon
thy shoulders, shall within this hour be off;
thy mistress enforced;
thy garments cut to pieces before thy face:
and all this done, spurn her home to her father;
who may haply be a little angry
for my so rough usage;
but my mother, having power of his testiness,
shall turn all into my commendations.
Out, sword, and to a sore purpose!
Fortune, put them into my hands!
You are not well: remain here in the cell;
We'll come to you after hunting.
Brother, stay here
Are we not brothers?
So man and man should be;
But clay and clay differs in dignity,
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick.
Go you to hunting; I'll abide with him.
So sick I am not, yet I am not well;
But not so citizen a wanton as
To seem to die ere sick: so please you, leave me;
Stick to your journal course: the breach of custom
Is breach of all.
I am ill, but your being by me
Cannot amend me; society is no comfort
To one not sociable: I am not very sick,
Since I can reason of it. Pray you, trust me here:
I'll rob none but myself; and let me die,
Stealing so poorly.
Brother, farewell.
I wish ye sport.
You health. So please you, sir.
These are kind creatures.
Gods, what lies I have heard!
Our courtiers say all's savage but at court:
Experience, O, thou disprovest report!
The imperious seas breed monsters, for the dish
Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish.
I am sick still; heart-sick.
Pisanio, I'll now taste of thy drug.
I cannot find those runagates;
That villian hath mocked me. I am faint!
What slave art thou?
Thou art a robber,
A law-breaker, a villain: yield thee, thief.
To who? to thee? What art thou? Have not I
An arm as big as thine? a heart as big?
Thy words, I grant, are bigger, for I wear not
My dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art,
Why I should yield to thee?
Thou villain base,
Know'st me not by my clothes?
Thou art some fool;
I am loath to beat thee.
Thou injurious thief,
Hear but my name, and tremble.
What's thy name?
Cloten, thou villain.
Cloten, thou double villain, be thy name,
I cannot tremble at it: were it Toad,
or Adder, Spider,
'Twould move me sooner.
To thy further fear,
Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know
I am son to the queen.
I am sorry for 't; not seeming
So worthy as thy birth.
Art not afeard?
Those that I reverence those I fear, the wise:
At fools I laugh, not fear them.
Die the death:
Yield, rustic mountaineer.
What hast thou done?
I am perfect what: cut off one Cloten's head,
Son to the queen, after his own report;
Who call'd me traitor, mountaineer, and swore
With his own single hand he'ld take us in
Displace our heads where--
thank the gods!--they grow,
And set them on Lud's-town.
We are all undone.
Why, worthy father, what have we to lose,
But that he swore to take, our lives?
The law protects not us: then why should we be tender
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us,
Play judge and executioner all himself,
For we do fear the law?
What company discover you abroad?
No single soul
Can we set eye on; but in all safe reason
He must have some attendants.
then on good ground we fear,
If we do fear this body hath a tail
More perilous than the head.
Let ordinance
Come as the gods foresay it: howsoe'er,
My brother hath done well.
I had no mind
To hunt this day: the boy Fidele's sickness
Did make my way long forth.
With his own sword,
Which he did wave against my throat, I have ta'en
His head from him: I'll throw't into the creek
And tell the fishes he's the queen's son, Cloten:
That's all I reck.
I fear 'twill be revenged:
Would, Polydote, thou hadst not done't!
though valour becomes thee well enough.
Would I had done't
So the revenge alone pursued me!
Well, 'tis done:
We'll hunt no more to-day, nor seek for danger
Where there's no profit. I prithee, to our cell;
Poor sick Fidele!
I'll weringly to him: to gain his colour
I'ld let a parish of such Clotens' blood,
And praise myself for charity.
O thou goddess,
Thou divine Nature, how thyself thou blazon'st
In these two princely boys!
'Tis wonder
That an invisible instinct should frame them
To royalty unlearn'd, honour untaught,
Civility not seen from other,
valour that wildly grows in them, but yields a crop
As if it had been sow'd.
Where's my brother?
I have sent Cloten's clotpoll down the stream,
In embassy to his mother: his body's hostage
For his return.
(Solemn music plays)
My ingenious instrument!
Hark, Polydore, it sounds! But what occasion
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark!
Is he at home?
He went hence even now.
What does he mean? since death of my dear'st mother
it did not speak before.
All solemn things should answer solemn accidents.
The matter?
The bird is dead
That we have made so much on.
I had rather have skipp'd
from sixteen years of age to sixty,
To have turn'd my leaping-time into a crutch,
than have seen this.
O melancholy!
Who ever yet could sound thy bottom?
find the ooze, to show what coast thy sluggish crare
Might easiliest harbour in?
How found you him?
Stark, as you see:
Thus smiling, as some fly hid tickled slumber,
Not as death's dart, being laugh'd at;
his right cheek
Reposing on a cushion.
Where?
O' the floor;
His arms thus leagued: I thought he slept,
and put my clouted brogues from off my feet,
whose rudeness answer'd my steps too loud.
Why, he but sleeps:
If he be gone, he'll make his grave a bed;
Fear no more the heat o' the sun,
Nor the furious winter's rages;
Thou thy worldly task hast done,
Home art gone, and ta'en thy wages:
Golden lads and girls all must,
As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.
Fear no more the frown o' the great;
Thou art past the tyrant's stroke;
Care no more to clothe and eat;
To thee the reed is as the oak:
The sceptre, learning, physic, must
All follow this, and come to dust.
Fear no more the lightning flash,
Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone;
Fear not slander, censure rash;
Thou hast finish'd joy and moan:
All lovers young, all lovers must
Consign to thee, and come to dust.
No exorciser harm thee!
Nor no witchcraft charm thee!
Ghost unlaid forbear thee!
Nothing ill come near thee!
Quiet consummation have;
And renowned be thy grave!
Great griefs, I see, medicine the less; for Cloten
Is quite forgotten. He was a queen's son, boys;
And though he came our enemy, remember
He was paid for that: though mean and mighty, rotting
Together, have one dust, yet reverence,
That angel of the world, doth make distinction
Of place 'tween high and low.
Our foe was prince
And though you took his life, as being our foe,
Yet bury him as a prince.
Pray You, fetch him hither.
Thersites' body is as good as Ajax',
When neither are alive.
Yes, sir, to Milford-Haven;
which is the way?--
I thank you.--By yond bush?--
Pray, how far thither?
'Ods pittikins! can it be six mile yet?--
I have gone all night. 'Faith, I'll lie down and sleep.
But, soft! no bedfellow!
--O god s and goddesses!
These flowers are like the pleasures of the world;
This bloody man, the care on't.
I hope I dream;
For so I thought I was a cell-keeper,
And cook to honest creatures:
but 'tis not so;
'Twas but a bolt of nothing, shot at nothing,
Which the brain makes of fumes:
our very eyes are sometimes like
our judgments, blind.
Good faith,
I tremble stiff with fear: but if there be
Yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity
As a wren's eye, fear'd gods, a part of it!
The dream's here still: even when I wake, it is
Without me, as within me; not imagined, felt.
A headless man! The garments of Posthumus!
I know the shape of's leg:
this is his hand;
His foot Mercurial; his Martial thigh;
The brawns of Hercules:
but his Jovial face
Murder in heaven?
How!' Tis gone.
Pisanio,
All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
And mine to boot, be darted on thee!
Thou, conspired with that irregulous devil, Cloten,
Hast here cut off my lord.
To write and read
Be henceforth treacherous! Damn'd Pisanio
Hath with his forged letters,--damn'd Pisanio--
From this most bravest vessel of the world
Struck the main-top! O Posthumus! alas,
Where is thy head? where's that? Ay me!
where's that?
Pisanio might have kill'd thee at the heart,
And left this head on. How should this be? Pisanio?
'Tis he and Cloten: malice and lucre in them
Have laid this woe here. O, 'tis pregnant, pregnant!
The drug he gave me, which he said was precious
And cordial to me, have I not found it
Murderous to the senses? That confirms it home:
This is Pisanio's deed, and Cloten's:
O! Give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood,
That we the horrider may seem to those
Which chance to find us: O, my lord, my lord!
Now, sir, What have you dream'd of late
of this war's purpose?
Last night the very gods show'd me a vision--
I fast and pray'd for their intelligence--thus:
I saw Jove's bird, the Roman eagle, wing'd
From the spongy south to this part of the west,
There vanish'd in the sunbeams: which portends--
Unless my sins abuse my divination--
Success to the Roman host.
Dream often so,
And never false.
Again; and bring me word how 'tis with her.
A fever with the absence of her son,
A madness, of which her life's in danger.
Heavens! How deeply you at once do touch me!
Imogen, The great part of my comfort, gone;
my queen upon a desperate bed,
and in a time when fearful wars point at me;
her son gone,
So needful for this present: it strikes me, past
The hope of comfort.
So please your majesty,
The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn,
Are landed on your coast, with a supply
Of Roman gentlemen, by the senate sent.
Now for the counsel of my son and queen!
I am amazed with matter.
Good my liege,
Your preparation can affront no less
Than what you hear of: come more, for more
you're ready:
The want is but to put those powers in motion
That long to move.
I thank you. Let's withdraw;
I heard no letter from my master since
I wrote him Imogen was slain: 'tis strange:
Nor hear I from my mistress who did promise
To yield me often tidings:
neither know I
What is betid to Cloten; but remain
Perplex'd in all. The heavens still must work.
Wherein I am false I am honest; not true, to be true
These present wars shall find I love my country,
Even to the note o' the king, or I'll fall in them
All other doubts, by time let them be clear'd:
Fortune brings in some boats that are not steer'd
Yea, bloody cloth, I'll keep thee, for I wish'd
Thou shouldst be colour'd thus.
You married ones,
If each of you should take this course, how many
Must murder wives much better than themselves
For wrying but a little! O Pisanio!
Every good servant does not all commands:
No bond but to do just ones.
Gods! if you should have ta'en vengeance
on my faults, I never
Had lived to put on this: so had you saved
The noble Imogen to repent, and struck
Me, wretch more worth your vengeance. But, alack,
You snatch some hence for little faults; that's love,
To have them fall no more: you some permit
To second ills with ills, each elder worse,
And make them dread it, to the doers' thrift.
But Imogen is your own: do your best wills,
And make me blest to obey!
I am brought hither
Among the Italian gentry, and to fight
Against my lady's kingdom: 'tis enough
That, Britain, I have kill'd thy mistress; peace!
I'll give no wound to thee.
Let's see the boy's face.
He's alive, my lord.
He'll then instruct us of this body.
Young one, inform us of thy fortunes, for it seems
They crave to be demanded. Who is this
Thou makest thy bloody pillow?
How came it? Who is it?
What art thou?
I am nothing: or if not,
Nothing to be were better.
I may wander
From east to occident,
Try many, all good, serve truly,
never find such another master.
'Lack, good youth!
Thou movest no less with thy complaining than
Thy master in bleeding:
Thy name?
Fidele, sir.
Thou dost approve thyself the very same:
Thy name well fits thy faith, thy faith thy name.
Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say
Thou shalt be so well master'd, but, be sure,
No less beloved.
I'll follow, sir.
So please you entertain me.
Ay, good youth!
And rather father thee than master thee.
I'll disrobe me
Of these Italian weeds and suit myself
As does a Briton peasant: so I'll fight
Against the part I come with; so I'll die
For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life
Is every breath a death; and thus, unknown,
Pitied nor hated, to the face of peril
Myself I'll dedicate.
Let me make men know
More valour in me than my habits show.
Gods, put the strength o' the Leonati in me!
To shame the guise o' the world, I will begin
The fashion, less without and more within.
The noise is round about us.
Let us from it.
What pleasure, sir, find we in life, to lock it
From action and adventure?
Nay, what hope
Have we in hiding us?
We'll higher to the mountains; there secure us.
To the king's party there's no going:
This is, sir, a doubt
In such a time nothing becoming you,
Nor satisfying us.
It is not likely
That when they hear the Roman horses neigh,
Behold their quarter'd fires, have both their eyes
And ears so cloy'd importantly as now,
That they will waste their time upon our note,
To know from whence we are.
O, I am known
Of many in the army: many years,
Though Cloten then but young, you see, not wore him
From my remembrance.
Pray, sir, to the army:
I and my brother are not known; yourself
So out of thought, and thereto so o'ergrown,
Cannot be question'd.
By this sun that shines,
I'll thither: what thing is it that I never
Did see man die! scarce ever look'd on blood,
But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison!
Never bestrid a horse, save one that had
A rider like myself, who ne'er wore rowel
Nor iron on his heel! I am ashamed
To look upon the holy sun, to have
The benefit of his blest beams, remaining
So long a poor unknown.
By heavens, I'll go:
If you will bless me, sir, and give me leave,
I'll take the better care, but if you will not,
The hazard therefore due fall on me
by the hands of Romans!
So say I amen.
No reason I, since of your lives you set
So slight a valuation, should reserve
My crack'd one to more care. Have with you, boys!
If in your country wars you chance to die,
That is my bed too, lads, an there I'll lie:
Camest thou from where they made the stand?
I did.
Though you, it seems, come from the fliers.
No blame be to you, sir; for all was lost,
But that the heavens fought: the king himself
Of his wings destitute, the army broken,
And but the backs of Britons seen, all flying
Through a straight lane; the enemy full-hearted,
Lolling the tongue with slaughtering, having work
More plentiful than tools to do't, struck down
Some mortally, some slightly touch'd, some falling
Merely through fear; that the straight pass was damm'd
With dead men hurt behind, and cowards living
To die with lengthen'd shame.
Where was this lane?
Close by the battle, ditch'd, and wall'd with turf;
Which gave advantage to an ancient soldier,
An honest one, I warrant; who deserved
So long a breeding as his white beard came to,
In doing this for's country: athwart the lane,
He, with two striplings-lads more like to run
The country base than to commit such slaughter
With faces fit for masks, or rather fairer
Than those for preservation cased, or shame--
Made good the passage; cried to those that fled,
'Our Britain s harts die flying, not our men:
To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards. Stand;
Or we are Romans and will give you that
Like beasts which you shun beastly, and may save,
But to look back in frown: stand, stand.'
These three,
Three thousand confident, in act as many--
For three performers are the file when all
The rest do nothing--with this word 'Stand, stand,'
Accommodated by the place, more charming
With their own nobleness, which could have turn'd
A distaff to a lance, gilded pale looks,
Part shame, part spirit renew'd; that some,
turn'd coward
But by example--O, a sin in war,
Damn'd in the first beginners!--gan to look
The way that they did, and to grin like lions
Upon the pikes o' the hunters.
This was strange chance
A narrow lane, an old man, and two boys.
Nay, do not wonder at it: you are made
Rather to wonder at the things you hear
Than to work any. Will you rhyme upon't,
And vent it for a mockery? Here is one:
'Two boys, an old man twice a boy, a lane,
Preserved the Britons, was the Romans' bane.'
Nay, be not angry, sir.
'Lack, to what end?
Who dares not stand his foe, I'll be his friend;
For if he'll do as he is made to do,
I know he'll quickly fly my friendship too.
You have put me into rhyme.
Farewell; you're angry.
Still going?
This is a lord! O noble misery,
To be i' the field, and ask 'what news?' of me!
To-day how many would have given their honours
To have saved their carcasses! took heel to do't,
And yet died too! I, in mine own woe charm'd,
Could not find death where I did hear him groan,
Nor feel him where he struck:
being an ugly monster,
'Tis strange he hides him in fresh cups, soft beds,
Sweet words; or hath more ministers than we
That draw his knives i' the war.
Well, I will find him
For being now a favourer to the Briton,
No more a Briton, I have resumed again
The part I came in: fight I will no more,
But yield me to the veriest hind that shall
Once touch my shoulder.
Great the slaughter is
Here made by the Roman; great the answer be
Britons must take. For me, my ransom's death;
On either side I come to spend my breath;
Which neither here I'll keep nor bear again,
But end it by some means for Imogen.
Stand! who's there?
A Roman,
Lay hands on him; a dog!
You shall not now be stol'n,
you have locks upon you;
Most welcome, bondage! for thou art away,
I think, to liberty: yet am I better
Than one that's sick o' the gout;
since he had rather
Groan so in perpetuity than be cured
By the sure physician, death, who is the key
To unbar these locks.
My conscience, thou art fetter'd
More than my shanks and wrists:
you good gods, give me
The penitent instrument to pick that bolt,
Then, free for ever! Is't enough I am sorry?
So children temporal fathers do appease;
Gods are more full of mercy. Must I repent?
I cannot do it better than in gyves,
Desired more than constrain'd: to satisfy,
If of my freedom 'tis the main part, take
No stricter render of me than my all.
I know you are more clement than vile men,
Who of their broken debtors take a third,
A sixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again
On their abatement: that's not my desire:
For Imogen's dear life take mine; and though
'Tis not so dear, yet 'tis a life; you coin'd it:
'Tween man and man they weigh not every stamp;
Though light, take pieces for the figure's sake:
You rather mine, being yours: and so, great powers,
If you will take this audit, take this life,
And cancel these cold bonds.
O Imogen!
I'll speak to thee in silence.
No more, thou thunder-master, show
Thy spite on mortal flies:
With Mars fall out, with Juno chide,
That thy adulteries
Rates and revenges.
Hath my poor boy done aught but well,
Whose face I never saw?
I died whilst in the womb he stay'd
Attending nature's law:
Lucina lent not me her aid,
But took me in my throes;
That from me was Posthumus ript,
Came crying 'mongst his foes,
A thing of pity!
With marriage wherefore was he mock'd,
To be exiled, and thrown
From Leonati seat, and cast
From her his dearest one,
Sweet Imogen?
Why did you suffer Iachimo,
Slight thing of Italy,
To taint his nobler heart and brain
With needless jealosy;
And to become the geck and scorn
O' th' other's villany?
Since, Jupiter, our son is good,
Take off his miseries.
Peep through thy marble mansion; help;
Or we poor ghosts will cry
To the shining synod of the rest
Against thy deity.
Help, Jupiter; or we appeal,
And from thy justice fly.
No more, you petty spirits of region low,
Offend our hearing; hush! How dare you ghosts
Accuse the thunderer, whose bolt, you know,
Sky-planted batters all rebelling coasts?
Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and rest
Upon your never-withering banks of flowers:
Be not with mortal accidents opprest;
No care of yours it is; you know 'tis ours.
Whom best I love I cross; to make my gift,
The more delay'd, delighted. Be content;
Your low-laid son our godhead will uplift:
His comforts thrive, his trials well are spent.
Our Jovial star reign'd at his birth, and in
Our temple was he married. Rise, and fade.
He shall be lord of lady Imogen,
And happier much by his affliction made.
This tablet lay upon his breast, wherein
Our pleasure his full fortune doth confine:
and so, away: no further with your din
Express impatience, lest you stir up mine.
Sleep, thou hast been a grandsire, and begot
A father to me; and thou hast created
A mother and two brothers:
but, O scorn!
Gone! they went hence so soon as they were born:
And so I am awake. Poor wretches that depend
On greatness' favour dream as I have done,
Wake and find nothing. But, alas, I swerve:
Many dream not to find, neither deserve,
And yet are steep'd in favours: so am I,
That have this golden chance and know not why.
What fairies haunt this ground? A book? O rare one!
Be not, as is our fangled world, a garment
Nobler than that it covers: let thy effects
So follow, to be most unlike our courtiers,
As good as promise.
'When as a lion's whelp shall, to himself unknown,
without seeking find, and be embraced by a piece of
tender air; and when from a stately cedar shall be
lopped branches, which, being dead many years,
shall after revive, be jointed to the old stock
and freshly grow; then shall Posthumus end his miseries,
Britain be fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty.'
'Tis still a dream, or else such stuff as madmen
Tongue and brain not; either both or nothing;
Or senseless speaking or a speaking such
As sense cannot untie. Be what it is,
The action of my life is like it,
which I'll keep, if but for sympathy.
Come, sir, are you ready for death?
Over-roasted rather; ready long ago.
Hanging is the word, sir:
if you be ready for that, you are well cooked.
So, if I prove a good repast to the spectators,
the dish pays the shot.
A heavy reckoning for you, sir. But the comfort is,
you shall be called to no more payments,
fear no more tavern-bills; which are often the sadness
of parting, as the procuring of mirth:
of this contradiction you shall now be quit.
O, the charity of a penny cord!
Knock off his manacles;
bring your prisoner to the king.
Thou bring'st good news; I am called to be made free.
I'll be hang'd then.
Stand by my side, you whom the gods have made
Preservers of my throne. Woe is my heart
That the poor soldier that so richly fought,
Whose rags shamed gilded arms, whose naked breast
Stepp'd before larges of proof, cannot be found:
He shall be happy that can find him, if
Our grace can make him so.
I never saw
Such noble fury in so poor a thing;
Such precious deeds in one that promises nought
But beggary and poor looks.
No tidings of him?
He hath been search'd among the dead and living,
But no trace of him.
To my grief, I am
The heir of his reward;
which I will add
To you, the liver, heart and brain of Britain,
By whom I grant she lives. 'Tis now the time
To ask of whence you are. Report it.
Sir,
In Cambria are we born, and gentlemen:
Further to boast were neither true nor modest,
Unless I add, we are honest.
Bow your knees.
Arise my knights o' the battle: I create you
Companions to our person and will fit you
With dignities becoming your estates.
There's business in these faces. Why so sadly
Greet you our victory? you look like Romans,
And not o' the court of Britain.
Hail, great king!
To sour your happiness, I must report
The queen is dead.
Who worse than a physician
Would this report become? But I consider,
By medicine life may be prolong'd, yet death
Will seize the doctor too. How ended she?
With horror, madly dying, like her life,
Which, being cruel to the world, concluded
Most cruel to herself. What she confess'd
I will report, so please you: these her women
Can trip me, if I err; who with wet cheeks
Were present when she finish'd.
Prithee, say.
First, she confess'd she never loved you, only
Affected greatness got by you, not you:
Married your royalty, was wife to your place;
Abhorr'd your person.
She alone knew this;
And, but she spoke it dying, I would not
Believe her lips in opening it. Proceed.
Your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love
With such integrity, she did confess
Was as a scorpion to her sight; whose life,
But that her flight prevented it, she had
Ta'en off by poison.
O most delicate fiend!
Who is 't can read a woman? Is there more?
More, sir, and worse. She did confess she had
For you a mortal mineral; which, being took,
Should by the minute feed on life and lingering
By inches waste you: in which time she purposed,
By watching, weeping, tendance, kissing, to
O'ercome you with her show, and in time,
When she had fitted you with her craft, to work
Her son into the adoption of the crown:
Heard you all this, her women?
We did, so please your highness.
Mine eyes
Were not in fault, for she was beautiful;
Mine ears, that heard her flattery; nor my heart,
That thought her like her seeming;
it had been vicious
To have mistrusted her: yet, O my daughter!
That it was folly in me, thou mayst say,
And prove it in thy feeling. Heaven mend all!
Thou comest not, Caius, now for tribute
Consider, sir, the chance of war: the day
Was yours by accident; had it gone with us,
We should not, when the blood was cool,
have threaten'd
Our prisoners with the sword. But since the gods
Will have it thus, that nothing but our lives
May be call'd ransom, let it come: sufficeth
A Roman with a Roman's heart can suffer:
Augustus lives to think on't: and so much
For my peculiar care.
This one thing only
I will entreat; my boy, a Briton born,
Let him be ransom'd:
never master had a page so kind, so duteous, diligent,
So tender over his occasions, true,
So feat, so nurse-like: let his virtue join
With my request, which I make bold your highness
Cannot deny; he hath done no Briton harm,
Though he have served a Roman: save him, sir,
And spare no blood beside.
I have surely seen him:
His favour is familiar to me.
Boy, Thou hast look'd thyself into my grace,
And art mine own. I know not why, wherefore,
To say 'live, boy:' ne'er thank thy master; live:
And ask of Cymbeline what boon thou wilt,
Fitting my bounty and thy state, I'll give it;
Yea, though thou do demand a prisoner,
The noblest ta'en.
I humbly thank your highness.
I do not bid thee beg my life, good lad;
And yet I know thou wilt.
No, no: alack,
There's other work in hand: I see a thing
Bitter to me as death: your life, good master,
Must shuffle for itself.
The boy disdains me,
He leaves me, scorns me: briefly die their joys
That place them on the truth of girls and boys.
What wouldst thou, boy? Speak.
Know'st him thou look'st on?
Is he thy kin? thy friend?
He is a Roman; no more kin to me
Than I to your highness; who, being born your vassal,
Am something nearer.
Wherefore eyest him so?
I'll tell you, sir, in private, if you please
To give me hearing.
Ay, with all my heart,
And lend my best attention. What's thy name?
Fidele, sir.
Thou'rt my good youth, my page;
I'll be thy master: walk with me; speak freely.
Is not this boy revived from death?
One sand another
Not more resembles that sweet rosy lad
Who died, and was Fidele. What think you?
The same dead thing alive.
Peace, peace! see further; he eyes us not; forbear;
It is my mistress:
Since she is living, let the time run on
To good or bad.
Stand thou by our side;
Make thy demand aloud.
Sir, step you forth;
Give answer to this boy, and do it freely;
Or, by our greatness and the grace of it,
Which is our honour, bitter torture shall
Winnow the truth from falsehood.
On, speak to him.
My boon is, that this gentleman may render
Of whom he had this ring.
What's that to him?
That diamond upon your finger, say
How came it yours?
Thou'lt torture me to leave unspoken that
Which, to be spoke, would torture thee.
How! me?
I am glad to be constrain'd to utter that
Which torments me to conceal.
By villany I got this ring: 'twas Leonatus' jewel;
Whom thou didst banish;
and--which more may grieve thee,
As it doth me--a nobler sir ne'er lived
'Twixt sky and ground. Wilt thou hear more, my lord?
All that belongs to this.
That paragon, thy daughter,--
For whom my heart drops blood, and my false spirits
Quail to remember--Give me leave; I faint.
My daughter! what of her? Renew thy strength:
I had rather thou shouldst live while nature will
Than die ere I hear more: strive, man, and speak.
Upon a time,--unhappy was the clock
That struck the hour!--it was in Rome,--accursed
The mansion where!--'twas at a feast,--O, would
Our viands had been poison'd, or at least
Those which I heaved to head!
--the good Posthumus--
What should I say? he was too good to be
Where ill men were; and was the best of all
Amongst the rarest of good ones,--sitting sadly,
Hearing us praise our loves of Italy
For beauty that made barren the swell'd boast
Of him that best could speak, for feature, laming
The shrine of Venus, or straight-pight Minerva.
Postures beyond brief nature, for condition,
A shop of all the qualities that man
Loves woman for, besides that hook of wiving,
Fairness which strikes the eye--
I stand on fire:
Come to the matter.
All too soon I shall,
Unless thou wouldst grieve quickly.
This Posthumus,
Most like a noble lord in love and one
That had a royal lover, took his hint;
And, not dispraising whom we praised,--therein
He was as calm as virtue--he began
His mistress' picture; which by his tongue
being made,
And then a mind put in't, either our brags
Were crack'd of kitchen-trolls,
or his description Proved us unspeaking sots.
Nay, nay, to the purpose.
Your daughter's chastity--there it begins.
He spake of her, as Dian had hot dreams,
And she alone were cold: whereat I, wretch,
Made scruple of his praise; and wager'd with him
Pieces of gold 'gainst this which then he wore
Upon his honour'd finger, to attain
In suit the place of's bed and win this ring
By hers and mine adultery.
He, true knight,
No lesser of her honour confident
Than I did truly find her, stakes this ring;
And would so, had it been a carbuncle
Of Phoebus' wheel, and might so safely, had it
Been all the worth of's car.
Away to Britain
Post I in this design: well may you, sir,
Remember me at court; where I was taught
Of your chaste daughter the wide difference
'Twixt amorous and villanous.
Being thus quench'd
Of hope, not longing, mine Italian brain
'Gan in your duller Britain operate
Most vilely; for my vantage, excellent:
And, to be brief, my practise so prevail'd,
That I return'd with simular proof enough
To make the noble Leonatus mad,
By wounding his belief in her renown
With tokens thus, and thus;
averting notes of chamber-hanging,
pictures, this her bracelet,--
O cunning, how I got it!--nay, some marks
Of secret on her person, that he could not
But think her bond of chastity quite crack'd,
I having ta'en the forfeit.
Whereupon-- Methinks, I see him now--
Ay, so thou dost,
Italian fiend! Ay me, most credulous fool,
Egregious murderer, thief, any thing
That's due to all the villains past, in being,
To come! O, give me cord, or knife, or poison,
Some upright justicer! Thou, king, send out
For torturers ingenious: it is I
That all the abhorred things o' the earth amend
By being worse than they. I am Posthumus,
That kill'd thy daughter:
--villain-like, I lie--
That caused a lesser villain than myself,
A sacrilegious thief, to do't:
the temple Of virtue was she; yea, and she herself.
Spit, and throw stones, cast mire upon me,
set the dogs o' the street to bay me: every villain
Be call'd Posthumus Leonitus;
and be villany less than 'twas!
O Imogen!
My queen, my life, my wife! O Imogen,
Imogen, Imogen!
Peace, my lord; hear, hear--
Shall's have a play of this? Thou scornful page,
There lie thy part.
O, gentlemen, help!
Mine and your mistress! O, my lord Posthumus!
You ne'er kill'd Imogen til now. Help, help!
Mine honour'd lady!
Does the world go round?
How come these staggers on me?
Wake, my mistress!
If this be so, the gods do mean to strike me
To death with mortal joy.
How fares thy mistress?
O, get thee from my sight;
Thou gavest me poison: dangerous fellow, hence!
Breathe not where princes are.
The tune of Imogen!
Lady,
The gods throw stones of sulphur on me,
if that box I gave you was not thought by me
A precious thing: I had it from the queen.
It poison'd me.
O gods!
I left out one thing which the queen confess'd.
Which must approve thee honest: 'If Pisanio
Have,' said she, 'given his mistress that confection
Which I gave him for cordial, she is served
As I would serve a rat.'
Have you ta'en of it?
Most like I did, for I was dead.
My boys, There was our error.
This is, sure, Fidele.
Why did you throw your wedded lady from you?
Think that you are upon a rock;
and now throw me again.
Hang there like a fruit, my soul,
Till the tree die!
How now, my flesh, my child!
What, makest thou me a dullard in this act?
Wilt thou not speak to me?
Your blessing, sir.
My tears that fall
Prove holy water on thee!
Imogen, Thy mother's dead.
I am sorry for't, my lord.
O, she was nought; and long of her it was
That we meet here so strangely: but her son
Is gone, we know not how nor where.
My lord,
Now fear is from me, I'll speak troth. Lord Cloten,
Upon my lady's missing, came to me
With his sword drawn; foam'd at the mouth, and swore,
If I discover'd not which way she was gone,
It was my instant death.
By accident, had a feigned letter of my master's
Then in my pocket; which directed him
To seek her on the mountains near to Milford;
Where, in a frenzy, in my master's garments,
Which he enforced from me, away he posts
With unchaste purpose and with oath to violate
My lady's honour: what became of him
I further know not.
Let me end the story:
I slew him there.
Marry, the gods forfend!
I would not thy good deeds should from my lips
Pluck a bard sentence: prithee, valiant youth,
Deny't again.
I have spoke it, and I did it.
He was a prince.
A most incivil one: the wrongs he did me
Were nothing prince-like; for he did provoke me
With language that would make me spurn the sea,
If it could so roar to me: I cut off's head;
And am right glad he is not standing here
To tell this tale of mine.
I am sorry for thee:
By thine own tongue thou art condemn'd,
and must endure our law.
Bind the offender,
And take him from our presence.
Stay, sir king:
This man is better than the man he slew,
As well descended as thyself; and hath
More of thee merited than a band of Clotens
Had ever scar for.
Let his arms alone;
They were not born for bondage.
Why, old soldier,
Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for,
By tasting of our wrath?
How of descent as good as we?
In that he spake too far.
And thou shalt die for't.
We will die all three:
But I will prove that two on's are as good
As I have given out him.
My sons, I must,
For mine own part, unfold a dangerous speech,
Though, haply, well for you.
Your danger's ours.
And our good his.
Have at it then, by leave.
Thou hadst, great king, a subject who
Was call'd Belarius.
What of him?
He is a banish'd traitor.
He it is that hath
Assumed this age; indeed a banish'd man;
I know not how a traitor.
Take him hence:
The whole world shall not save him.
Not too hot:
First pay me for the nursing of thy sons;
And let it be confiscate all, so soon
As I have received it.
Nursing of my sons!
I am too blunt and saucy: here's my knee:
Ere I arise, I will prefer my sons;
Then spare not the old father. Mighty sir,
These two young gentlemen, that call me father
And think they are my sons, are none of mine;
They are the issue of your loins, my liege,
And blood of your begetting.
How! my issue!
So sure as you your father's. I, old Morgan,
Am that Belarius whom you sometime banish'd:
These gentle princes--
For such and so they are--these twenty years
Have I train'd up: those arts they have as I
Could put into them; my breeding was, sir, as
Your highness knows. Their nurse, Euriphile,
Whom for the theft I wedded,
stole these children
Upon my banishment: I moved her to't,
Having received the punishment before,
For that which I did then: beaten for loyalty
Excited me to treason: their dear loss,
The more of you 'twas felt, the more it shaped
Unto my end of stealing them. But, gracious sir,
Here are your sons again; and I must lose
Two of the sweet'st companions in the world.
The benediction of these covering heavens
Fall on their heads like dew! for they are worthy
To inlay heaven with stars.
Thou weep'st, and speak'st.
The service that you three have done is more
Unlike than this thou tell'st. I lost my children:
If these be they, I know not how to wish
A pair of worthier sons.
Be pleased awhile.
This gentleman, whom I call Polydore,
Most worthy prince, as yours, is true Guiderius:
This gentleman, my Cadwal, Arviragus,
Your younger princely son; he, sir, was lapp'd
In a most curious mantle, wrought by the hand
Of his queen mother, which for more probation
I can with ease produce.
Guiderius had
Upon his neck a mole, a sanguine star;
It was a mark of wonder.
This is he;
Who hath upon him still that natural stamp:
It was wise nature's end in the donation,
To be his evidence now.
O, what, am I
A mother to the birth of three? Ne'er mother
Rejoiced deliverance more. Blest pray you be,
That, after this strange starting from your orbs,
may reign in them now!
O Imogen, thou hast lost by this a kingdom.
No, my lord;
I have got two worlds by 't. O my gentle brothers,
Have we thus met? O, never say hereafter
But I am truest speaker you call'd me brother,
When I was but your sister; I you brothers,
When ye were so indeed.
Did you e'er meet?
Ay, my good lord.
And at first meeting loved;
O rare instinct!
See, Posthumus anchors upon Imogen,
And she, like harmless lightning, throws her eye
On him, her brothers, me, her master,
hitting each object with a joy:
Let's quit this ground,
And smoke the temple with our sacrifices.
Thou art my brother; so we'll hold thee ever.
My good master,
I will yet do you service.
Happy be you!
The forlorn soldier, that so nobly fought,
He would have well becomed this place, and graced
The thankings of a king.
I am, sir,
The soldier that did company these three
In poor beseeming; 'twas a fitment for
The purpose I then follow'd. That I was he,
Speak, Iachimo: I had you down and might
Have made you finish.
I am down again:
But now my heavy conscience sinks my knee,
As then your force did. Take that life, beseech you,
Which I so often owe: but your ring first;
And here the bracelet of the truest princess
That ever swore her faith.
Kneel not to me:
The power that I have on you is, to spare you;
The malice towards you to forgive you:
Live, and deal with others better.
Nobly doom'd!
We'll learn our freeness of a son-in-law;
Pardon's the word to all.
You holp us, sir,
As you did mean indeed to be our brother;
Joy'd are we that you are.
Your servant, princes. Good my lord of Rome,
Call forth your soothsayer:
as I slept, methought
Great Jupiter, upon his eagle back'd,
Appear'd to me, with other spritely shows
Of mine own kindred: when I waked, I found
This label on my bosom; whose containing
Is so from sense in hardness, that I can
Make no collection of it:
let her show her skill in the construction.
Read, and declare the meaning.
'When as a lion's whelp shall, to himself
unknown, without seeking find, and be embraced by a
piece of tender air; and when from a stately cedar
shall be lopped branches, which, being dead
many years, shall after revive,
be jointed to the old stock, and freshly grow;
then shall Posthumus end his miseries,
Britain be fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty.'
Thou, Leonatus, art the lion's whelp;
The fit and apt construction of thy name,
Being Leonatus, doth import so much.
The piece of tender air, thy virtuous daughter,
Which we call 'mollis aer;' and 'mollis aer'
We term it 'mulier:' which 'mulier' I divine
Is this most constant wife; who, even now,
Answering the letter of the oracle,
Unknown to you, unsought, were clipp'd about
With this most tender air.
This hath some seeming.
The lofty cedar, royal Cymbeline,
Personates thee: and thy lopp'd branches point
Thy two sons forth; who, by Belarius stol'n,
For many years thought dead, are now revived,
To the majestic cedar join'd, whose issue
Promises Britain peace and plenty.
Well
My peace we will begin.
And, Caius Lucius,
Although the victor, we submit to Caesar,
And to the Roman empire; promising
To pay our wonted tribute, from the which
We were dissuaded by our wicked queen;
Whom heavens, in justice, both on her and hers,
Have laid most heavy hand.
The fingers of the powers above do tune
The harmony of this peace. The vision
Which I made known to Lucius, ere the stroke
Of this yet scarce-cold battle, at this instant
Is full accomplish'd; for the Roman eagle,
From south to west on wing soaring aloft,
Lessen'd herself, and in the beams o' the sun
So vanish'd: which foreshow'd our princely eagle,
The imperial Caesar, should again unite
His favour with the radiant Cymbeline,
Which shines here in the west.
Laud we the gods;
And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils
From our blest altars.